===============================================================
AW-SDX 2.0 Controller - Topology Data Model Specification 2.0.0
===============================================================

Versioning
==========

+--------+---------+--------------------------------------------------+
| V      | Date    | Description                                      |
| ersion |         |                                                  |
+========+=========+==================================================+
| 1.0.0  | 07/     | Specifies the Physical topology specification.   |
|        | 09/2021 |                                                  |
+--------+---------+--------------------------------------------------+
| 1.0.1  | 01/     | Changes datetime format to follow the ISO8601    |
|        | 14/2022 | standard.                                        |
+--------+---------+--------------------------------------------------+
| 1.0.2  | 02/     | Added State and Status to the Node object        |
|        | 14/2022 |                                                  |
+--------+---------+--------------------------------------------------+
| 2.0    | 03/     | Added support for Layer 2 VPN services.          |
| .0-pre | 01/2023 |                                                  |
+--------+---------+--------------------------------------------------+
| 2.0.0  | 04/     | Added support for ISO3166. Link Type attribute   |
|        | 01/2024 | was deprecated.                                  |
+--------+---------+--------------------------------------------------+

Introduction
============

The AtlanticWave-SDX 2.0 Controller (a.k.a. SDX Controller) needs
topology data from each participant Open Exchange Point (OXP) to compute
the AtlanticWave-SDX topology database. The AtlanticWave-SDX topology
database will have a few purposes:

1. Finding the best path between endpoints based on multiple user
   criteria;

2. Exporting the AtlanticWave-SDX topology database to external science
   applications to support their operations;

3. Monitoring the quality of the AtlanticWave-SDX network resources.

Each OXP's SDX Local Controller (a.k.a. SDX-LC [1]_) must feed the SDX
Controller with topology data using the data model specified in this
document. The SDX Controller uses the topology data received from each
SDX-LC to create a network graph. This network graph must be capable of
supporting Constrained Shortest Path First (CSPF) algorithms using
user-provided optional requirements, such as:

-  Shortest propagation delay

-  Fewest number of OXPs in the path

-  Avoiding specific vendors or countries in the path

-  Most reliable path

-  Highest/specific bandwidth available

The approach to collect the topological data from the OXP Orchestrator
(a.k.a. OXPO) is *outside* the scope of this document. However, to
clarify for the readerâ€™s understanding, there are three main approaches
for the SDX-LC to gather topology data from an OXPO:

1) The OXPO supports the AW-SDX 2.0 Topology Data Model specification
   (this document) and *pushes* the topology data to the SDX-LC via
   OpenAPI interfaces;

2) The OXPO supports the AW-SDX 2.0 Topology Data Model specification,
   but the SDX-LC has to *pull* the topology data using the OXPO's API;

3) The OXPO does not support the AW-SDX 2.0 Topology Data Model
   specification. In this case, each SDX-LC has to pull topology data
   using the OXPO's API and existing OXPO's topology data model, and
   then convert the retrieved topology data to the AW-SDX 2.0 Topology
   Data Model specification.

The main outcome of the proposed topology data model is to support
science drivers, such as Open Science Grid (OSG). With the available
AW-SDX topology, OSG can make cache population decisions based on
network characteristics, for instance, the closest OSG Cache node to an
OSG Origin node.

Requirement Levels
==================

The Topology Data Model specification provides the requirements and
restrictions for the topology objects and their attributes. To avoid
confusion and misinterpretation, the key words "must", "must not",
"required", "shall", "shall not", "should", "should not", "recommended",
"may", and "optional" in this document are to be interpreted as
described in IETF RFC 2119 [https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt].

Privacy and Security
====================

For privacy and security reasons, since the SDX topology database will
be available to SDX users, OXP operators will be able to define which
topology attributes must be removed or anonymized before being exported
by the SDX Controller to SDX users. This control will be made by adding
to each topology object a property named "private" with the name of the
properties to be considered private. When the private property is not
empty, the SDX Controller must filter out the content of the attributes
listed before exporting the topology to external users, including
science drivers. This specification recommends that all attributes be
public. Anonymization is *outside* of the scope of this specification.

Autonomic Network Architecture Properties
=========================================

The AW-SDX 2.0 Topology Data Model specification is not affected by the
Autonomic Network Architecture (ANA) since it is not a service or
function but a data structure. The SDX Controller components involved in
the topology data exchange should consider two ANA disciplines:
*self-configuration* and *self-protection*. In the context of the
topology data exchange, *self-configuration* applies when the components
involved (OXPO and SDX-LC) need to discover their configurations
dynamically. The connections between OXPO and SDX-LC should not be
statically defined, for instance, via IP addresses. For
*self-protection*, the SDX-LC should be protecting itself from bursts of
topology updates coming from the OXPO due to link flaps and other
updates at the OXP level. Neither should the SDX-LC burst updates to the
SDX Controller. However, the implementation and enforcement of the ANA
disciplines are *outside* of the scope of this document.

Creating the topology
=====================

Version 1.0 of the AW-SDX 2.0 Topology Data Model specification focused
on the physical layer. Version 2.0 of the AW-SDX 2.0 Topology Data Model
specification focuses on adding support for Layer 2 Virtual Private
Networks (VPNs) across multiple OXPs under the AtlanticWave-SDX
management. Newer versions will be created to add service-specific
properties that will leverage the AW-SDX 2.0 Topology Data Model.

The AW-SDX 2.0 Topology Data Model specification is compatible with the
GRENML model [https://code.canarie.ca/gren_map] to simplify future
adoption. AW-SDX 2.0 extends the GRENML with properties to address its
needs. Like the GRENML model, this specification is based on JSON, which
stands for JavaScript Object Notation. JSON was chosen because of its
simplicity to be read by humans and machines.

The diagram below will be used to explain the relationship between the
topology objects.

|image1|

Each topology object will be described in detail in the next subsections
as well as its dependencies.

Topology Object
===============

The Topology object is represented by the following attributes or
properties:

-  **name**

-  **id**

-  **version**

-  **model_version**

-  **timestamp**

-  **nodes**

-  **links**

-  **services**

The **nam**\ **e** attribute is a string that represents the OXP name.
**name** will be used to display the OXP name within the SDX web
user-interface (UI). **name** is operator-defined. **name** must be
limited to 30 (thirty) ASCII characters and only the following special
characters are allowed: "." (period), "," (comma), "-" (dash), "\_"
(underscore)", and "/" (forward slash) .

The **id** attribute is a Uniform Resource Name (URN) used to uniquely
identify the OXP in the AW-SDX context. To guarantee the URN is unique,
since two OXPs could have the same acronym or name, the OXP operator
must use the OXP website or opertor's URL as part of the URN. The
topology ID will follow the format: *"urn:sdx:topology:<oxp_url>"*, for
instance *"urn:sdx:topology:amlight.net" for AmLight,
"urn:sdx:topology:rnp.br" for SAX and "urn:sdx:topology:tenet.ac.za" for
ZAOXI.*

The Topology Object has two properties to indicate changes to OXPO's
topology and counters: **version** and **timestamp**:

-  **version** is an unsigned integer and starts as 1 when the OXP is
   added to the AW-SDX and it will increment by 1 every time that there
   is an *administrative* change that MODIFIES the topology.
   Administrative changes are those created by the network operators.
   Below are some examples of changes that modify the topology and will
   increase the version number:

   -  A new node is added or removed by the OXP operator..

   -  A new link is added or removed.

   -  A new user port is configured.

   -  When the location of an item changes (node moved to a different
      address).

   -  A link or node is set to *maintenance* mode and becomes unusable.

   -  A link that was reconfigured to go through a different location
      (city or country).

   -  A change on the port/interface bandwidth via configuration.

   -  A change on the list of VLAN IDs supported by an interface via
      configuration.

-  **timestamp** starts with a timestamp of when the topology was
   created. **timestamp** changes every time the topology changes
   (administrative or not), and when link counters, state, or status are
   updated:

   -  A port, node, or link that changed from up to down or down to up
      because of a problem (power outage, fiber cut, damaged
      transceiver).

   -  A change in the bandwidth utilization of a link.

   -  An increase in packet loss or drops on a port.

**versio**\ n and **timestamp** will be used by the SDX-LC and SDX
Controller to know how to process the topology update received and what
kind of changes to expect.

The **model_version** attribute describes which topology data model
specification version is in use, since updates might happen. The current
version is the string "2.0.0".

The **nodes** and **links** attributes are list attributes. **nodes** is
a list of Node objects and **links** is a list of Link objects. Both
Node and Link objects are described in this specification.

The **services** attribute is used to list the types of service
supported by the OXP. This attribute was added in version 2.0.0. Version
2.0.0 supports the value "l2vpn-ptp" for point to point Layer 2 VPNs
(VLAN-based service between two endpoints) and "l2vpn-ptmp" for point to
multipoint (VLAN-based service between multiple endpoints). For
compatibility with previous versions, when the **services** attribute is
not provided, the SDX Controller must assume that the OXP supports
"l2vpn-ptp".

Restrictions
------------

1.  **name, id, version, model_version, timestamp, nodes, links**
    attributes must be provided when creating the topology data.

2.  **name, id, version, model_version, timestamp, nodes, links**
    attributes must not be empty.

3.  **name** must be an ASCII string with length shorter than 31
    characters.

4.  **name** supports only the following special characters: "."
    (period), "," (comma), "-" (dash), "\_" (underscore)", and "/"
    (forward slash) .

5.  **id** must follow the format *"urn:sdx:topology:<url>"* where
    *<url>* is the OXP's website main domain name.

6.  **version** must be an unsigned integer that starts with 1 and
    increments by 1 when there are administrative topology changes.

7.  **version** will be 1 only when the SDX-LC is added for the first
    time to AW-SDX.

8.  **timestamp** attribute must be the timestamp and be updated when
    there are non-administrative topology changes.

9.  **timestamp** must be a string and must follow the ISO 8601
    standard. The ISO8601 standard has the format
    "YYYY-MM-DDTHH:mm:SSZ", where YYYY stands for four-digit year, MM
    stands for two-digit month, DD stands for two-digit day of the
    month, HH stands for two-digit hour using 24 hours, mm stands for
    two-digit minutes, and SS stands for two-digit seconds. Between DD
    and HH the character T is inserted and the string ends with the
    character Z.

10. **timestamp** must be based on UTC.

11. **model_version** must be "2.0.0".

12. **nodes** attribute must be a non-empty list of Node objects.

13. **links** attribute must be a list of Link objects or an empty list
    (case when the OXP does not have intra-domain links).

14. **services** attribute is a list of strings and optional. The
    version 2.0.0 only accepts values "l2vpn-ptp" and "l2vpn-ptmp". If
    the **services** attribute is not provided or provided as empty, the
    SDX Controller must consider that the OXP supports point-to-point
    VLAN-based VPN services (Point-to-Point L2VPN). When exporting the
    topology to SDX users, the SDX Controller should add the
    **services** attribute with the proper value.

15. The Topology Object has no attribute that can be set to private
    since all attributes are essential for the SDX operation.

Example
-------

Example of a topology object, where the attributes **nodes** and
**lists** are removed to simplify the representation. Examples of
**nodes** and **lists** are provided in the next subsections.

.. code-block::

   {
       "name": "AmLight-OXP",
       "id": "urn:sdx:topology:amlight.net",
       "version": 2,
       "timestamp": "2021-07-07 21:19:40",
       "model_version": "2.0.0",
       "nodes": [ {...}, {...} ],
       "links": [ {...}, {...} ],
       "services": ["l2vpn-ptp", "l2vpn-ptmp"]
   }

Node Object
===========

The Node object is represented by the following attributes or properties
of a network device, such as a switch or a router:

-  **name**

-  **id**

-  **location**

-  **ports**

-  **status**

-  **state**

The **name** attribute is a string that represents the node name.
**name** will be used to display the node name within the SDX web
user-interface (UI). **name** is operator-defined. **name** must be
limited to 30 (thirty) ASCII characters and only the following special
characters are allowed: "." (period), "," (comma), "-" (dash), "\_"
(underscore)", and "/" (forward slash).

The **id** attribute is a Uniform Resource Name (URN) used to uniquely
identify the node in the AW-SDX context. The OXP operator is responsible
for guaranteeing the uniqueness of the URN. The node ID will follow the
format: *"urn:sdx:node:<oxp_url>:<node_name>".* The <*oxp_url>* is the
OXP website or operator's URL, the same used for the Topology Object.
The *<node_name>* represents the name of the node and should be derived
from the attribute **name**, entirely or a subset of it. It is up to the
OXP operator to make this definition. Some examples of IDs:

-  *"urn:sdx:node:redclara.net:switch_01"*

-  *"urn:sdx:node:amlight.net:juniper_router01"*

-  *"urn:sdx:node:sax.net:s1"*

-  *"urn:sdx:node:tenet.za.ac:tor"*

**location** is used to represent the physical location of the node. The
Location object is used and it must not be empty.

**ports** is a list of ports that belong to the node. The content for
**ports** is a list of Port objects. Each port has a set of attributes
to reflect the current network state and status. The Port Object is
described in the next sections.

The **status** attribute represents the current operational status of
the node. **Status** is an enum with the following values: "down" if the
node is not operational, "up" if the node is operational, 'error' when
there is an error with the node.

The **state** attribute represents the current administrative state of
the node. **State** is an enum with the following values: "enabled" if
the node is in administrative enabled mode, "disabled" when the node is
in administrative disabled mode, and "maintenance" when the node is
under maintenance (not available for use).


Restrictions
------------

1.  **name, id, location,** and **ports** must be provided when creating
    the node object.

2.  **name, id, location,** and **ports** must not be empty.

3.  **name** must be an ASCII string with length not to exceed 30
    characters.

4.  **name** must not include special characters.

5.  **id** must follow the format *"urn:sdx:node:<oxp_url>:<node_name>"*
    where *<oxp_url>* is the OXP's website or operator's website domain
    name.

6.  **location** must be a Location object.

7.  **ports** must be a non-empty list of Port Objects.

8.  The Node Object has no attributes that can be set to private since
    all attributes are essential for the SDX operation. However, the
    Location Object attributes can be manipulated to not provide the
    exact location. More details can be found in the Location Object
    section.

9.  **status** is an enum and only supports one of the following values:
    "up", "down", or "error"

10. **state** is an enum and only supports one of the following values:
    "enabled", "disabled", or "maintenance"

.. _example-1:

Example
-------

Example of a Node object, where the attribute **ports** is removed to
simplify the representation. Examples of **ports** are provided in the
Port Object subsection.

.. code-block::

   {
       "name": "switch01",
       "id": "urn:sdx:node:amlight.net:switch01",
       "location": {
           "address": "Miami,FL,USA",
           "latitude": "25.761681",
           "longitude": "-80.191788"
       },
       "ports": [ {...}, {...} ],
       "status": "up",
       "state": "enabled"
   }

Port Object
===========

The Port object is represented by the following attributes or properties
of a network device's port (or interface):

-  **name**

-  **id**

-  **node**

-  **type**

-  **mtu**

-  **nni**

-  **status**

-  **state**

-  **services**

The **name** attribute is a string that represents the name of the port
and it will be used to display the node name within the SDX portals. It
is operator-defined. The only restriction created for the **name**
attribute is its length of 30 (thirty) characters and only the following
special characters are allowed: "." (period), "," (comma), "-" (dash),
"\_" (underscore)", and "/" (forward slash).

The **id** attribute is a Uniform Resource Name (URN) used to uniquely
identify the port in the AW-SDX context. The OXP operator is responsible
for guaranteeing the uniqueness of the URN. The port ID will follow the
format: *"urn:sdx:port:<oxp_url>:<node_name>:<port_name>".* The
<*oxp_url>* is the same URL used to create the Topology Object ID. The
*<node_name>* is the same URL used to represent the Node Object ID. The
*<port_name>* represents the name of the port and should be derived from
the attribute **name**, entirely or a subset of it. It is up to the OXP
operator to make this definition. Some examples of valid port **id**\ s
are:

-  *"urn:sdx:port:amlight.net:switch_01:port_1"*

-  *"urn:sdx:port:amlight.net:tor:131"*

-  *"urn:sdx:port:rnp.br:juniper_router01:amlight_100G"
   "urn:sdx:port:zaoxi.ac.za:s1:port_to_brazil"*

The **node** attribute is a Uniform Resource Name (URN) used to uniquely
identify which node the port belongs to in the AW-SDX context.

The **type** attribute represents the technology and bandwidth of the
physical port (or interface). **type** is an enum with only one value
acceptable. The Topology data model specification supports only
Ethernet. The **type** enum is 100FE, 1GE, 10GE, 25GE, 40GE, 50GE,
100GE, 400GE, and *Other.* When the value *Other* is chosen, no
bandwidth guaranteed services will be supported in this port. The value
*Other* was created to enable flexibility when the port is not on the
enum. In case *Other* becomes recurrent, the SDX team must increase the
specification subversion and add the correct bandwidth to the **type**
enum. The specification version table must be updated with such info.

The **mtu** attribute is the port's maximum transmission unit (MTU) or
the max size of a packet supported by the port in bytes. **mtu** is a
kind of attribute that could become a challenge to dynamically retrieve
from a node. For this reason, this attribute is considered optional, but
recommended.

The **nni** attribute is used to describe if the port is a Network to
Network Interface (NNI). NNI will be used to qualify the port as an
endpoint of an intra-domain (internal) or an inter-domain (external)
link. If **nni** is not set (an empty string), the port is considered an
UNI (User to Network Interface), meaning a user port. From the SDX
perspective, a R&E network that is not operated by the AtlanticWave-SDX
Controller is considered a user port. If the port is a NNI, there are
two ways to use this field: *if it is a intra-domain link*, then the
**nni** attribute must be set with the *Link* ID (URN to represent the
Link). If the port is an *inter-domain link*, the **nni** attribute must
be set with the remote OXP's *Port ID*. For example, if the port is a
NNI part of the link "*Novi03/p2_Novi02/p3*" at the AmLight OXP, then
the **nni** attribute is set to
*"urn:sdx:link:amlight.net:Novi03/p2_Novi02/p3".* If the port is an
AmLight port connected to ZAOXI OXP, with remote node at ZAOXI being
"*s1"* and remote port at ZAOXI being "*port_to_brazil*" then the
**nni** attribute on the AmLight topology side is set to
*"urn:sdx:port:zaoxi.ac.za:s1:port_to_brazil".* Following the same
approach, the port on ZAOXI connected to AmLight OXP, with remote node
at AmLight being "*switch_01*" and remote port at AmLight being
"*port_1*", will result in the **nni** attribute on the ZAOXI topology
side is set to *"urn:sdx:port:amlight.net:switch_01:port_1".*

The **status** attribute represents the current operational status of
the port. **Status** is an enum with the following values: "down" if the
port is not operational, "up" if the port is operational, 'error' when
there is an error with the interface.

The **state** attribute represents the current administrative state of
the port. **State** is an enum with the following values: "enabled" if
the port is in administrative enabled mode, "disabled" when the port is
in administrative disabled mode (a.k.a. *shutdown)*, and "maintenance"
when the port is under maintenance (not available for use).

The **services** attribute comprises the services supported and their
attributes. **services** is a dictionary. When empty, it is assumed that
the Port object supports Point-to-Point L2VPN services and ALL VLAN IDs
are supported, from 1 to 4095. The keys of the dictionary are the
services listed in the Topology object, for instance "l2vpn-ptp". And
each key is another dictionary with values specific to the service, for
instance, "vlan_range" for the range of VLAN IDs supported by the Port.


Restrictions
------------

1.  **name, id, node, type, status,** and **state** must be provided
    when creating the node object.

2.  **name, id, node, type, status,** and **state** must not be empty.

3.  **name** must be an ASCII string with length not to exceed 30
    characters.

4.  **name** supports only the following special characters: "."
    (period), "," (comma), "-" (dash), "\_" (underscore)", and "/"
    (forward slash).

5.  **id** must follow the format
    *"urn:sdx:port:<oxp_url>:<node_name>:<port_name>"* where *<oxp_url>*
    is the OXP's website or operator's website domain name,
    *<node_name>* is the node's name, and *<port_name>* is the port's
    name.

6.  When **mtu** is not set, the port's MTU is considered to be 1,500
    bytes.

7.  **mtu** is an integer with minimum value of 1,500 and maximum of
    10,000.

8.  When **nni** is not set (empty string), the port is considered an
    UNI.

9.  **status** is an enum and only supports one of the following values:
    "up", "down", or "error"

10. **state** is an enum and only supports one of the following values:
    "enabled", "disabled", or "maintenance"

11. **services** is a dictionary with the following supported keys:
    "l2vpn-ptp" and "l2vpn-ptmp". Each key is another dictionary with
    the subkey "vlan_range".

12. **services** is a dictionary that, when empty, is treated as having
    the key "l2vpn-ptp" and subkey "vlan_range" with values from 1 to
    4095. If the key "l2vpn-ptp" is provided and empty, the same
    applies: the "vlan_range" should be treated as with values from 1 to
    4095.

13. The "vlan_range" key under "l2vpn-ptp" and "l2vpn-ptmp" is a
    comma-delimited list of tuples, where each tuple's element 0 is the
    first VLAN ID of the range and the tuple's element 1 is the last
    VLAN ID of the range. Multiple tuples can be provided in any
    sequence. The minimum VLAN ID supported is 1 and the maximum VLAN ID
    supported is 4095.

14. From the Port Object, **mtu**, **status**, **state, and services**
    can be set as private attributes although it is highly recommended
    to keep them public.

Examples
--------

.. code-block::

   {
       "id": "urn:sdx:port:amlight.net:s3:s3-eth2",
       "name": "s3-eth2",
       "node": "urn:sdx:node:amlight.net:s3",
       "type": "10GE",
       "mtu": 10000,
       "status": "up",
       "state": "enabled",
       "nni": "urn:sdx:link:amlight.net:Novi03/2_s3/s3-eth2",
       "services": {
           "l2vpn-ptp": {
               "vlan_range": [[1,100], [300,305], [1000,1500]]
           }
       },
       "private": ["state", "mtu"]
   }

.. code-block::   

   {
       "id": "urn:sdx:port:amlight.net:s3:s3-eth4",
       "name": "s3-eth4",
       "node": "urn:sdx:node:amlight.net:s3",
       "type": "100GE",
       "mtu": 9000,
       "status": "up",
       "state": "enabled",
       "nni": "",
       "services": {
           "l2vpn-ptp": {
               "vlan_range": [[1,4000]]
           },
           "l2vpn-ptmp": {
               "vlan_range": [[1,1000], [2000,3000]]
           }
       },
       "private": ["state", "mtu"]
   }

Location Object
===============

The Location object is represented by the following attributes or
properties of a physical location:

-  **address**

-  **latitude**

-  **longitude**

-  **:mark:`iso3166_2_lvl4`**

The **address** attribute is a string that represents the physical
location. It can be a full address, the name of a city, or a country.
**address** will be used to display a node's address within the SDX web
user-interface (UI). **address** is operator-defined. **address** must
be limited to 255 (two hundred and fifty five) ASCII characters.

The **latitude** attribute is the geographic coordinate that specifies
the northâ€“south position of a node on the Earth's surface.

The **longitude** attribute is the geographic coordinate that specifies
the eastâ€“west position of a node on the Earth's surface.

The **iso3166_2_lvl4** attribute is used to enable operators to share
the ISO3611 codes for location. The ISO3611 defines internationally
recognized codes of letters and/or numbers that we can use when we refer
to countries and their subdivisions.


Restrictions
------------

1. **address, latitude, longitude,** and **iso3166_2_lvl4** must be
   provided when creating the Location object.

2. **address, latitude, longitude,** and **iso3166_2_lvl4** must not be
   empty.

3. **latitude** and **longitude** must be represented as a string with a
   floating point number, in the range of -90.0 to 90.0.

4. **address** must be an ASCII string with length no longer than 255
   characters.

5. For privacy reasons, **address, latitude,** and **longitude** can be
   provided with content that doesn't show the exact location of a node.

6. **Iso3166_2_lvl4 is specified at**
   https://www.iso.org/iso-3166-country-codes.html\ **.** The first part
   is the ISO 3166-1 alpha-2 code of the country. The second part is a
   string of up to three alphanumeric characters, which is usually
   obtained from national sources and stems from coding systems already
   in use in the country concerned, but may also be developed by the ISO
   itself.


Examples
--------

.. code-block::

   {
       "address": "Miami, FL, USA",
       "latitude": "25",
       "longitude": "-80",
       "iso3166_2_lvl4": "US-FL"
   }

.. code-block::   

   {
       "address": "Equinix MI3, Boca Raton, FL, USA",
       "latitude": "26.35869",
       "longitude": "-80.0831",
       "iso3166_2_lvl4": "US-FL"
   }


Link Object
===========

The Link object is represented by the following attributes or properties
of a network connection between two network devices:

-  **name**

-  **id**

-  **ports**

-  **type**

-  **bandwidth**

-  **residual_bandwidth**

-  **latency**

-  **packet_loss**

-  **availability**

-  **status**

-  **state**

The **name** attribute is a string that represents the name of the link
and it will be used to display the link name within the SDX web user
interface (UI). It is operator defined. The only restriction created for
the **name** attribute is its maximum length of 30 (thirty) characters
and only the following special characters are allowed: "." (period), ","
(comma), "-" (dash), "\_" (underscore)", and "/" (forward slash).

The **id** attribute is a Uniform Resource Name (URN) used to uniquely
identify the link in the AW-SDX context. The OXP operator is responsible
for guaranteeing the uniqueness of the URN. The link ID will follow the
format: *"urn:sdx:link:<oxp_url>:<link_name>".* The <*oxp_url>* is the
same URL used to create the Topology Object ID. The *<link_name>*
represents the name of the link. Some examples of valid link **id**\ s
are:

-  *"urn:sdx:link:amlight.net:saopaulo_miami"*

-  *"urn:sdx:link:ampath.net:lsst_100G"*

-  *"urn:sdx:link:rnp.br:ana_100G_dc_paris"*

-  *"urn:sdx:link:zaoxi.ac:link_to_amlight"*

The **ports** attribute lists the Port object IDs that create the link.
For the scope of the AtlanticWave-SDX, all links will be point-to-point.
However, since the **ports** attribute is a list, the list structure
offers the SDX team some flexibility for future specifications. For the
current topology data model specification, the **ports** attribute has
*two* Port IDs only (Reminder: Port ID is the Port's URN and it must be
represented as a string).

The **type** attribute describes if a Link object represents an
intra-OXP link (internal) or an inter-OXP link (external). For the
current specification, **type** is an enum and the *only* value
acceptable and supported is "intra". The value "intra" is used to
describe intra-OXP links. Future versions could have different values.
Currently, the attribute "**type**" is present in the specification for
compatibility with the topology data model specification version 1.0.0.

The **bandwidth** attribute describes the maximum capacity in terms of
bandwidth of a Link object. The bandwidth of a link could be the
interface's bandwidth or a leased capacity provided by a carrier to the
OXP. Bandwidth must represent how much bandwidth capacity is accessible
to be used by the SDX community in units of Gbps. For instance, a 50
Gbps link must have the attribute **bandwidth** set to 50. **bandwidth**
accepts a fractional value. For instance, for a 500 Mbps or 3250 Mbps
link, **bandwidth** must be converted to Gbps, with values 0.5 and 3.25
respectively.

The **residual_bandwidth** attribute describes the average bandwidth
available for the Link object. The representation of the
**residual_bandwidth** must be provided in percentage from 0 to 100 of
the **bandwidth** attribute. For instance, if **bandwidth** is 40Gbps
and the Link average utilization is 25Gbps (or 62.5%), the
**residual_bandwidth** must have value **37.5**, meaning 37.5%. The OXP
operator is responsible for defining the time interval to be based, for
instance, the last 30 days, the last day, or the last 12 hours. This
specification *suggests* that **residual_bandwidth** to be based on the
last 7 to 14 days for better accuracy and decision making.

The **latency** attribute describes the delay introduced by the Link
object in milliseconds to the end-to-end path. In optical networks or
lit services, latency represents the propagation delay between the two
endpoints (Port objects) and tends to be deterministic. In Carrier
Ethernet and MPLS networks, latency reports the service delay between
two endpoints (Port objects) and varies according to the carrier's
network state at the moment. **latency** accepts a fractional value.

The **packet_loss** attribute describes a percentage of packet loss
observed for the Link object. The representation of the **packet_loss**
must be provided in percentage from 0 to 100. **packet_loss** accepts a
fraction value. The OXP operator is responsible for defining the time
interval to be based, for instance, the last 14 days, the last day, or
the last 12 hours. This specification *suggests* that **packet_loss** to
be based on the last 24 hours or less for better accuracy and decision
making. This specification leaves it for the OXP operator to decide the
approach to retrieve the Link's packet loss. As a suggestion, OXP
operators could use OWAMP installed in perfSONAR nodes, IP SLA, OAM, or
similar technologies.

The **availability** attribute describes the percentage of time the link
has been available for data transmission. Also known as reliability, the
**availability** attribute is a metric used by the SDX Controller to
select the best path when provisioning and re-provisioning services
based on the criticality of the service requested. For instance,
real-time and interactive applications should be provisioned using links
with the best **availability** possible. The representation of the
**availability** must be provided in percentage from 0 to 100. The OXP
operator is responsible for defining the time interval and the formula
to be used when computing the availability. This specification
*suggests* that **availability** to be based on the last 14 days or less
for better accuracy and decision making. This specification *suggests*
that **availability** takes into consideration both full outage as well
as flaps when calculating the resilience of the link.

The **status** attribute represents the current operational status of
the link. **Status** is an enum with the following values: "down" if the
link is not operational, "up" if the link is operational, 'error' when
there is an error with the interface.

The **state** attribute represents the current administrative state of
the link. **State** is an enum with the following values: "enabled" if
the link is in administrative enabled mode, "disabled" when the link is
in administrative disabled mode (a.k.a. *shutdown)*, and "maintenance"
when link in under maintenance (not available for use).


Restrictions
------------

1.  **name, id, ports, bandwidth, status,** and **state** must be
    provided when creating the link object.

2.  **name, id, ports, bandwidth, status,** and **state** must not be
    empty.

3.  **name** must be an ASCII string with length not to exceed 30
    characters.

4.  **name** supports only the following special characters: "."
    (period), "," (comma), "-" (dash), "\_" (underscore)", and "/"
    (forward slash).

5.  **id** must follow the format *"urn:sdx:link:<oxp_url>:<link_name>"*
    where *<oxp_url>* is the OXP's website or operator's website domain
    name and *<link_name>* is the link's name.

6.  t\ **ype** is optional attribute and it is an enum with acceptable
    value "intra" for intra-OXP..

7.  **bandwidth** must be a numerical value greater than 0 and to be
    provided as a unit in Gbps.

8.  **residual_bandwidth** must be provided as a numerical percentage
    value from 0 to 100 of the **bandwidth** attribute.

9.  **packet_loss** must be provided as a numerical percentage value
    from 0 to 100.

10. **availability** must be provided as a numerical percentage value
    from 0 to 100.

11. **residual_bandwidth, latency, packet_loss,** and **availability**
    must be provided as 100, 0, 0, and 100 respectively when collecting
    these counters is not possible from the OXP Operator. These
    variables can be assigned fraction values.

12. **status** is an enum and only supports one of the following values:
    "up", "down", or "error".

13. **state** is an enum and only supports one of the following values:
    "enabled", "disabled", or "maintenance".

14. From the Link Object, **residual_bandwidth**, **latency, and**
    **packet_loss** can be set as private attributes although it is
    highly recommended to keep them public.


Example
-------

.. code-block::

   {
       "id": "urn:sdx:link:amlight.net:saopaulo_miami",
       "name": "100G Sao Paulo to Miami",
       "ports": [
           "urn:sdx:port:amlight.net:s3:s3-eth2",
           "urn:sdx:port:amlight.net:s2:s2-eth1"
       ],
       "bandwidth": 100,
       "residual_bandwidth": 50,
       "latency": 108,
       "packet_loss": 0,
       "availability": 100,
       "state": "enabled",
       "status": "maintenance",,
       "private": ["packet_loss"]
   }

Schemas
=======

The data model schemas in this specification are provided at [1] for
easy implementation and validation.

*[1]* https://github.com/atlanticwave-sdx/datamodel/blob/main/schemas/

.. [1]
   The SDX Local Controller (SDX-LC) is a major component of the AW-SDX
   2.0 architecture. A design objective of the SDX-LC is to abstract the
   distinct physical characteristics of a participant OXP.

.. |image1| image:: ../../figures/topology-objects.png
   :width: 3.31771in
   :height: 2.58473in
